Add ismip6 forcing testgroup (#410)
MPAS-Dev/compass: docs/users_guide/landice/test_groups/ismip6_forcing.rst

``True`` or ``False`` on whether to process the RACMO modern climatology
(``True`` is required to run the ``ProcessSMBRacmo`` step, which needs to take
precedent to running ``ProcessSMB`` step. In the ``ismip6_ais_ocean_thermal``
section, users need to indicate ``True`` or ``False`` and on whether to process
the observational thermal forcing data, which represents the modern ocean
climatology between 1995-2017. When ``process_obs_data`` is set to ``True``,
ocean forcing anomaly files from climate models are not processed (these files
will only be processed when ``process_obs_data`` is set to ``False``)

For all of the config sections specific to each test case, users need to define
the interpolation scheme among ``bilinear``, ``neareststod`` and ``conserve``
methods (however, note that the ocean basal test case should always use the
``neareststod`` method because the source files have a single valued data per
basin.)

Below is the default config options:

.. code-block:: cfg

    # config options for ismip6 antarctic ice sheet data set
    [ismip6_ais]

    # Base path to the input ismip6 ocean and smb forcing files. User has to supply.

>     base_path_ismip6 = None

Reviewer: In this config file, the actual values are `NotAvailable`, rather than `None`:
```suggestion
    base_path_ismip6 = NotAvailable
```

    # MALI mesh file to be used to build mapping file (netCDF format). User has to supply.
    mali_mesh_file = None

    # config options for ismip6 antarctic ice sheet SMB forcing data test cases
    [ismip6_ais_atmosphere]

    # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Options include: bilinear, neareststod, conserve
    method_remap = None

    # config options for ismip6 ocean thermal forcing data test cases
    [ismip6_ais_ocean_thermal]

    # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Options include: bilinear, neareststod, conserve
    method_remap = None

    # Set to True if the want to process observational thermal forcing data. Set to False if want to process model thermal forcing data.
    # Note: when set True, the ['ismip6_ais'] config options 'period_endyear', 'model' and 'scenario' will be ignored.
    process_obs_data = None

    # config options for ismip6 ocean basal test case
    [ismip6_ais_ocean_basal]

    # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Ocean basal testcase will always want to
    # use neareststod method.
    method_remap = None

Below is the example config options that users might create in running

> the test group

Reviewer: Even though it's obvious, can you expand this explanation to state that the example is for processing the NorESM1-M RCP 2.6 repeat forcing to the year 2300?

.. _landice_ismip6_forcing:

> ismip6_forcing
> ============

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ismip6_forcing
==============
```

> ============

Reviewer: Overall, one thing I think is missing from these instructions for a user is the overall process they would need to run with. Here is my attempt at that info (not formatted correctly for RST).  Please correct me if this info is wrong.

 For a given MALI mesh, a user will need to:
* run `landice/ismip6_forcing/ocean_basal` once, independent of the model, scenario or end year
* run `landice/ismip6_forcing/ocean_thermal` once with `process_obs_data = True` to process the thermal forcing from the observational climatology (used for control runs)
* for each model, scenario and end year:
  * run `landice/ismip6_forcing/atmosphere`
    * If you have never run any model with `process_racmo_smb = True`, you need to do this once
    * for subsequent runs, you can set `process_racmo_smb = False` but it is harmless to run it again as it does nothing if the data is already available.
  * run  `landice/ismip6_forcing/ocean_thermal`

The ``landice/ismip6_forcing`` test group processes (i.e., remaps and renames)
the atmospheric and ocean forcing data of the Ice Sheet Model Intercomparison for CMIP6
(ISMIP6) protocol. The processed data is used to force MALI in future ice sheet

> simulations. The test group includes three test cases, ``atmosphere``,``ocean_basal`` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
simulations. The test group includes three test cases, ``atmosphere``, ``ocean_basal`` and
```

``ocean_thermal``. Each test case contains one main step, called
``ProcessSMB``, ``ProcessBasalMelt`` and ``ProcessThermalForcing``.
Each step has the local methods (functions) of remapping and
renaming the original ismip6 data to the format that MALI can incorporate in
its forward simulations. In remapping the data, all test cases import the
method ``build_mapping_file`` to create or use scrip files
of the source (ISMIP6) and destination (MALI) mesh depending on the existence
of a mapping file. Approximated time for processing a single forcing file
on Cori (single core) is 2, 7, and 1 minutes for the atmosphere, ocean basal,
and ocean thermal testcase, respectively.

The ISMIP6 source data can be obtained by directly

> contacting the authors. Reference: https://www.climate-cryosphere.org/wiki/index.php?title=ISMIP6-Projections2300-Antarctica#A2.2_Retrieving_datasets_and_uploading_your_model_output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contacting the authors. `Reference <https://www.climate-cryosphere.org/wiki/index.php?title=ISMIP6-Projections2300-Antarctica#A2.2_Retrieving_datasets_and_uploading_your_model_output>`_
```

Reviewer: I don't think it will work to put in the full URL and anyway I'd prefer not to.

Reviewer: Putting in the URL does seem to work but I still would prefer to have it be a link like above.

Reviewer: Also, rather than
```
The ISMIP6 source data can be obtained by directly
contacting the authors
```
I would say something like, "The ISMIP6 source data can be obtained by contacting the ISMIP6 steering committee as described..."

Reviewer: The steering committee aren't necessarily the authors.

> Once the users get access to the data on Globus (https:www.globus.org), they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the users get access to the data on `Globus <https:www.globus.org>`_, they
```

Author: ```suggestion
Once the users get access to the data on Globus (https://www.globus.org), they
```

need to create a base directory that is equivalent to the GHub globus endpoints
(e.g., ``GHub-ISMIP6-Forcing`` for the 2100CE projection protocol and

> ``ISMIP6-Projections-Forcing-2300`` for the 2300CE projection protocol.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``ISMIP6-Projections-Forcing-2300`` for the 2300CE projection protocol).
```

Users also need to manually download the files in the same directory name and
structure as on the endpoint (including the ``imbie2_basin_numbers_8km.nc``
file in the ``Ocean_Forcing/imbie2/`` directory, which is provided in the

> globus ``GHub-ISMIP6-Forcing`` endpoint.

Reviewer: I think this part needs quite a bit more explanation, including an example list of files for one model, scenario and end year.  For example, it isn't clear that you need only the `Regridded_8km` folder under the atmospheric forcing.  It isn't clear that you only need the atmospheric anomaly files (not the climatology) and that you don't need the files form 1950 to 1994 (I believe that's correct).

On the ocean side, it isn't clear that you only need the `1995-<end_year>` folder and not the `1850-1994`.  It's not clear if you need `temperature` and `salinity` or just `thermal_forcing`.

The `parameterizations` folder isn't mentioned explicitly either.  Since this data is only available from `GHub-ISMIP6-Forcing`, similarly to the IMBIE basins, it should probably be mentioned as well in that same sentence.  Which files are needed from `parameterizations`?

The `GHub-ISMIP6-Forcing` has `Atmosphere_Forcing` and  `Ocean_Forcing` folder with a capital `F` but `ISMIP6-Projections-Forcing-2300` uses a lowercase `f` for both.  It seems important to mention that and to state whether users need to have to match that exactly.  For the parameterization and IMBIE basins for 2300, does that mean you need an `Ocean_forcing` folder for the thermal forcing and an `Ocean_Forcing` folder for the parameterizations and IMBIE basins?

In addition to the ISMIP6 forcing files and the basin numbers file, users have

> to download the RACMO modern climatology data `Jan Melchior van Wessem et al
> . (2018) https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/12/1479/2018/#section7>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to download the RACMO modern climatology data 
`Jan Melchior van Wessem et al. (2018) https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/12/1479/2018/#section7>`_.
```
A link like this can't be divided across lines.

Reviewer: I looked at the paper but it wasn't clear to me which data I needed to download.  I think this needs to be expanded to more thoroughly explain which data set is needed (which specific files) and how to get it from this link.

Reviewer: The closest I found was this but it's only until 2016:
https://www.projects.science.uu.nl/iceclimate/publications/data/2018/vwessem2018_tc/RACMO_Yearly/

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this is using a dataset that Michiel van den Broeke sent me by email a few years again, which I put up on Cori. The 2018 TC paper is still the correct reference.

Reviewer 2: We could also use data from here: https://zenodo.org/record/6602723#.YyERTcHMIbY
This "constitutes an update of the simulation forced from 1979-2018 by ERA-Interim reported in van Wessem et al., 2018", but I don't know if 1979–2018 are different here or not. Would be worth taking a look in order to cite a publicly available dataset rather than one sent by email.

Author: For now, I've put a place holder in the document saying users should reach out to Trevor to acquire the RACMO data file.

Author: This has been resolved as we now have the file on our database ` https://web.lcrc.anl.gov/public/e3sm/mpas_standalonedata/mpas-albany-landice/`

if they want to run the ``atmosphere`` test case. The RACMO file is used to
correct the ismip6 the surface mass balance (SMB) data with the modern

> climatology. Users also have to provide the MALI mesh to which the processed
> forcing files will be saved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
climatology. Users also have to provide the MALI mesh to which the processed
forcing files will be saved.  More information about obtaining these meshes will
be provided as soon as they are publicly available.
```

Once the input (source) files are downloaded in the proper directory structure,

> users can configure necessary options (see the below ``config options``
> section for more detail and an example) as well as the ``output_base_path``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
users can configure necessary options (see :ref:`landice_ismip6_forcing_config`
for more detail and an example) as well as the ``output_base_path``
```

within which the subdirectory called ``atmosphere_forcing/``,
``basal_melt/`` and ``ocean_thermal_forcing/`` (and further subdirectories that
match the input file directory structure) are created if the directories do

> not already exist), and processed files will be saved there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not already exist, and where processed files will be saved.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. _landice_ismip6_forcing_config:

```

config options
--------------

All three test cases share some set of default config options under the section
``[ismip6_ais]`` and have separate config options for each test case:
``[ismip6_ais_atmosphere]``, ``[ismip6_ais_ocean_thermal]``, and
``[ismip6_ais_ocean_basal]``. In the general config section
``[ismip6_ais]``, users need to supply base paths to input files and MALI mesh

> file, and MALI mesh name, as well as the model name, climate forcing scenario

Reviewer: It seems worth mentioning here (as well as in the config files below) that we only support a subset of the models from 2100 and why that choice was made.  (Are the other models only in lower tier experiments?)  Here are some 2100 models I see that we don't seem to support: 2 different `CNRM` models, `MIROC`, `IPSL`, maybe others.

Author: Thanks for taking a closer look at the dictionaries, @xylar! The `CNRM` models ,`MIROC` and `IPSL` models are supported in the 2100 projection (https://github.com/MPAS-Dev/compass/blob/7119e28a942b65618e2699b87b00c7dd41110ee8/compass/landice/tests/ismip6_forcing/atmosphere/process_smb.py#L343-L369), and all the experiments listed in the ISMIP6 protocols (e.g., `experiment 1-13` and `exp A1-8` for ISMIP6-2100 and `exp A1-14` (tier1 and tier2) for ISMIP6-2300). I saw that  the `ccsm4_rcp2.6` folder is provided on Ghub ISMIP 2100, but the forcing is not used in any experiments. We can go through it together when we meet to see if I'm missing something.

and the projection end year of the ISMIP6 forcing data, which can be chosen

> from the available options as given in the config file (see examples below.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the available options as given in the config file (see the example file below).
```

In the ``ismip6_ais_atmosphere`` section, users need to indicate
``True`` or ``False`` on whether to process the RACMO modern climatology

> (``True`` is required to run the ``ProcessSMBRacmo`` step, which needs to take
> precedent to running ``ProcessSMB`` step. In the ``ismip6_ais_ocean_thermal``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(``True`` is required to run the ``process_smb_racmo`` step, which needs to be
run before the ``process_smb`` step). In the ``ismip6_ais_ocean_thermal``
```

section, users need to indicate ``True`` or ``False`` and on whether to process
the observational thermal forcing data, which represents the modern ocean

> climatology between 1995-2017. When ``process_obs_data`` is set to ``True``,

Reviewer: I don't think there are instructions on how to find this dataset.

ocean forcing anomaly files from climate models are not processed (these files
will only be processed when ``process_obs_data`` is set to ``False``)

> For all of the config sections specific to each test case, users need to define
> the interpolation scheme among ``bilinear``, ``neareststod`` and ``conserve``
> methods (however, note that the ocean basal test case should always use the
> ``neareststod`` method because the source files have a single valued data per
> basin.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For most of the config sections specific to each test case, users may choose
the interpolation scheme among ``bilinear``, ``neareststod`` and ``conserve``
methods.  The exception is that the ``ocean_basal`` test case should always use the
``neareststod`` method because the source files have a single valued data per
basin.
```

    [ismip6_ais_atmosphere]

    # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Options include: bilinear, neareststod, conserve
    method_remap = NotAvailable

    # Set True to process RACMO modern climatology.
    process_smb_racmo = NotAvailable

    # Full path to the RACMO regional climate model SMB data for the modern climatology.
    base_path_racmo = NotAvailable

    # config options for ismip6 ocean thermal forcing data test cases.
    [ismip6_ais_ocean_thermal]

    # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Options include: bilinear, neareststod, conserve
    method_remap = NotAvailable

    # Set to True if the want to process observational thermal forcing data.
    # Set to False if want to process model thermal forcing data.
    # Note: when set True, the ['ismip6_ais'] config options 'period_endyear', 'model' and 'scenario' will be ignored.
    process_obs_data = NotAvailable

    # config options for ismip6 ocean basal test case
    [ismip6_ais_ocean_basal]

    # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Ocean basal testcase will always want to
    # use neareststod method.

>     method_remap = NotAvailable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    method_remap = neareststod
```
@hollyhan, could you check that this whole namelist is accurate by just copying and pasting it again?

Below is the example config options that users might create in running
the test group. This example is for processing the NorESM1-M RCP2.6 repeat
forcing to the year 2300 onto the 8-80km Antarctic Ice Sheet MALI mesh.

> The example is configured to perform the `Atmosphere.processSMBRacmo` step to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example is configured to perform the ``atmosphere\process_smb_racmo`` step to
```

    period_endyear = 2300

    # Base path to which output forcing files are saved.
    output_base_path = /Users/hollyhan/Desktop/Data/ISMIP6-Projections-Forcing-2300_Processed/

    # Name of climate model name used to generate ISMIP6 forcing data. User has to supply.
    # Available model names are the following: CCSM4, CESM2-WACCM, CSIRO-Mk3-6-0, HadGEM2-ES, NorESM1-M, UKESM1-0-LL
    model = NorESM1-M

    # Scenarios used by climate model. User has to supply.
    # Available scenarios are the following: RCP26, RCP26-repeat, RCP85, SSP126, SSP585
    scenario = RCP26-repeat

    # name of the mali mesh. User has to supply. Note: It is used to name mapping files
    # (e,g. 'map_ismip6_8km_to_{mali_mesh_name}_{method_remap}.nc').
    mali_mesh_name = Antarctica_8to80km

    # MALI mesh file to be used to build mapping file (netCDF format). User has to supply.
    mali_mesh_file = Antarctica_8to80km_20220407.nc

    # config options for ismip6 antarctic ice sheet SMB forcing data test cases
    [ismip6_ais_atmosphere]

    # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Options include: bilinear, neareststod, conserve
    method_remap = bilinear

> 

Reviewer: I changed my mind, I think these are fine to leave here.

    # Set True to process RACMO modern climatology
    process_smb_racmo = True

    # Full path to the RACMO regional climate model SMB data for the modern climatology
    base_path_racmo = /Users/hollyhan/Desktop/Data/ISMIP6-Projections-Forcing-2300/RACMO2.3p2_ANT27_SMB_yearly_1979_2018/

    # config options for ismip6 ocean thermal forcing data test cases
    [ismip6_ais_ocean_thermal]

    # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Options include: bilinear, neareststod, conserve
    method_remap = bilinear

    # Set to True if the want to process observational thermal forcing data. Set to False if want to process model thermal forcing data.

>     # Note: when set True, the ['ismip6_ais'] config options 'period_endyear', 'model' and 'scenario' will be ignored.

Reviewer: This comment is a little different from the defaults above.  I think it would be best to make all the comments in the example match the defaults unless there's a reason not to.

    process_obs_data = False

>     # config options for ismip6 ocean basal test case
>     [ismip6_ais_ocean_basal]
> 
>     # Remapping method used in building a mapping file. Ocean basal testcase will always want to
>     # use neareststod method.
>     method_remap = neareststod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I would remove this since the default is always what we want.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. _landice_ismip6_forcing_atmosphere:

```

atmosphere
----------

> The ``landice/ismip6_forcing/atmosphere``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``landice/ismip6_forcing/atmosphere`` test case
```

performs processing of the surface mass balance (SMB) forcing data provided by
the ISMIP6 and RACMO. Processing data includes regridding the SMB forcing data
SMB data from the native grid (polarstereo grid for the ISMIP6 files and
rotated pole grid for the RACMO file) to MALI's unstructured grid, renaming
variables, and correcting the ISMIP6 SMB anomaly field for the base SMB
(modern climatology) provided by RACMO.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. _landice_ismip6_forcing_ocean_basal:

```

ocean_basal
------------

> The ``landice/tests/ismip6_forcing/ocean_basal``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``landice/tests/ismip6_forcing/ocean_basal`` test case
```

performs processing of the coefficients for the basal melt parameterization
utilized by the ISMIP6 protocol. Processing data includes combining the
IMBIE2 basin numbers file and parameterization coefficients and remapping onto
the MALI mesh.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. _landice_ismip6_forcing_ocean_thermal:

```

ocean_thermal
-------------

> The ``landice/ismip6_forcing/ocean_thermal``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``landice/ismip6_forcing/ocean_thermal`` test case
```

``process_thermal_forcing``, respectively. (For more details on the steps of
each test case, see :ref:`landice_ismip6_forcing_atmosphere`,
:ref:`landice_ismip6_forcing_ocean_basal` and
:ref:`landice_ismip6_forcing_ocean_thermal`.)
Approximated time for processing a single forcing file
on Cori (single core) is 2, 7, and 1 minutes for the atmosphere, ocean basal,
and ocean thermal testcase, respectively.

Before providing the details of necessary source data of the ISMIP6 protocols,
we provide a summary of instructions of an overall process of this test group:
To start off, users need to provide a MALI mesh onto which the source data
will be remapped and renamed. More information about obtaining these meshes will
be provided as soon as they are publicly available. Then, for a given MALI mesh,

1. run :ref:`landice_ismip6_forcing_ocean_basal` once, independent of the
model, scenario and end year.

2. run :ref:`landice_ismip6_forcing_ocean_thermal` once with
``process_obs_data = True`` in the config file (:ref:`landice_ismip6_forcing_config`)
to process the thermal forcing from the observational climatology (used for

> control runs).

Reviewer: Make sure to update the documentation here and elsewhere if you choose to make these changes.

file) that cover the period from 1995 to ``period_endyear``
(either 2100 or 2300, defined in the config file;
see :ref:`landice_ismip6_forcing_config`).

Equivalently, for the
ocean forcing, the user should create the directory path
``AIS/Ocean_Forcing/ukesm1-0-ll_ssp585/1995-2100/`` and download the file
``UKESM1-0-LL_ssp585_thermal_forcing_8km_x_60m.nc`` from the same endpoint.
Users do not need to download the thermal
forcing files for the years previous to 1995 as only the files downloaded from
``1995-{period_endyear}`` will be processed.
Also note to be ware that unlike those in the ``GHub-ISMIP6-Forcing`` endpoint,
the directory names in the ``ISMIP6-Projections-Forcing-2300`` endpoint have a
lower case "f" for the ``AIS/Atmospheric_forcing/`` and ``AIS/Ocean_forcing/``.

In addition to atmospheric and ocean thermal forcing files that
correspond to specific climate model (e.g., UKESM1-0-LL, CCSM4) and scenarios
(e.g., SSP585, RCP85, RCP26-repeat), modern
climatology files are needed. For the ``atmosphere`` testcase, users
need to download the RACMO modern climatology data
``RACMO2.3p2_ANT27_smb_yearly_1979_2018.nc`` from

> `here. <https://web.lcrc.anl.gov/public/e3sm/mpas_standalonedata/mpas-albany-landice/>`_

Reviewer: Since this is in the compass database, I don't think we want users to download this themselves.  Instead, compass should do int automatically and put it in its local, shared database.
